Divide and Conquer Review (#82)
Ada-Developers-Academy/ada-CS-Fundamentals-Internship: 01-algorithms/02-algorithms-divide-conquer.md

# Divide and Conquer

> ## Goals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learning Goals
```

> You may recall learning about divide and conquer algorithms such as Binary Search, Quick Sort, and Merge Sort. This lesson is intended to serve as a refresher for the divide and conquer approach.

Reviewer: Move binary search to the end since it's _techically_ not divide and conquer.
```suggestion
You may recall learning about divide and conquer algorithms such as Quick Sort, and Merge Sort, Binary Search. This lesson is intended to serve as a refresher for the divide and conquer approach.
```

This lesson requires prior knowledge about the divide and conquer technique and you are encouraged to re-read the Divide and Conquer lesson under the Algorithmic Strategies topic provided during classroom if you require more details about any of the review topics mentioned here. Any new topics covered in this lesson will be clearly indicated.

## Overview

> As a reminder, **Divide and Conquer** is an approach to problem solving that breaks down a large problem into multiple, smaller subproblems. We use the results of those subproblems to solve the original problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reminder, **Divide and Conquer** is an approach to problem solving that breaks down a large problem into multiple, smaller subproblems. We combine the results of those subproblems to solve the original problem.
```

1. Move all elements smaller than the pivot to the left and all elements larger than the pivot to the right. Note that the pivot is now in the correct index. Picking a pivot and rearranging the elements is referred to as _partitioning_.

> 1. Perform QuickSort on the left and right sides of the pivot.

Reviewer: I'm a visual learner so I feel like I'd benefit from adding the visualization back here

        if array[i] < pivot:
            temp = array[i]
            array[i] = array[p_index]
            array[p_index] = temp
            p_index += 1
        i += 1

    # swap the pivot value to the end of the smaller list. after this
    # swap, we know that all values to the left of the pivot are smaller,
    # and all values to the right of the pivot are greater or equal
    temp = array[i]
    array[i] = array[p_index]
    array[p_index] = temp

    return p_index
```

</details>

### !callout-info

## Partitioning Is the Key

There are a variety of strategies for selecting the pivot, and for how to rearrange the elements around the pivot. We will not go into further detail about them here, but follow your curiosity!

### !end-callout

## Example: Merge Sort
### Example: Merge Sort

Merge sort is another divide-and-conquer algorithm. It involves the following three stages:

1. _Divide_ the array into two subarrays at each step until each subarray is of size one.
2. _Sort_ each subarray with the merge sort algorithm. (An array of size one is trivially sorted.)
3. _Merge_ the subarrays into one array by combining two subarrays into one at each step.

> This process is usually done by keeping track of three indices in the array: _starting index_, _ending index_ and _midway index_ as shown in the image below.

Reviewer: Same here, I actually really like the photo we provide

Author: Added this back. Thank you for the suggestion!

![Merge sort example. The list starts with the values (7, 2, 8, 1, 6, 5, 3, 9) (s=0, m=4, e=8). This is split into to lists with one having (7, 2, 8, 1) (s=0, m=2, e=4), and the other having (6, 5, 3, 9) (s=4, m=6, e=8). Each list of four values is split into two lists of 2 value, resulting in 4 total lists. (7, 2) (s=0, m=1, e=2), (8, 1) (s=2, m=3, e=4), (6, 5) (s=4, m=5, e=6), and (3, 9) (s=6, m=7, e=8). Finally, each list of two is split into two single item lists for a total of 8 single item lists. (7) (s=0, e=1), (2) (s=1, e=2), (8) (s=2, e=3), (1) (s=3, e=4), (6) (s=4, e=5), (5) (s=5, e=6), (3) (s=6, e=7), (9) (s=7, e=8). Now each array has only a single value, making it implicitly sorted. The individual subarrays are merged so that they preserve their sorted property by combining them into a temporary array, then copying the sorted values over the merged range until the entire array becomes sorted.](images/algorithmic-strategies_divide-and-conquer_merge-sort.png)  
 _Fig. Example run of merge sort showing the index calculations used to split and merge the arrays. Note the convention used of the end index being exclusive._

### Example: Binary Search (Decrease-and-Conquer)

> Binary search can be considered a decrease-and-conquer algorithm because it decreases the size of the array by half with each step. No matter how large the original array was, at each step we'll be able to discard half the remaining data from consideration! The half-sized array will then be analyzed with the same step as the full-sized array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Binary search is often called a decrease-and-conquer algorithm because it decreases the size of the array by half with each step. No matter how large the original array was, at each step we'll be able to discard half the remaining data from consideration! The half-sized array will then be analyzed with the same step as the full-sized array.
```

> Binary search is technically not considered a divide-and-conquer algorithm but instead a decrease-and-conquer algorithm because divide-and-conquer algorithms typically have *two or more* subproblems which are generated from the main problem. In contrast, the binary search algorithm decreases to one sub-problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Binary search is technically not a divide-and-conquer algorithm but instead a decrease-and-conquer algorithm because divide-and-conquer algorithms typically have *two or more* subproblems which are generated from the main problem. In contrast, the binary search algorithm decreases to one subproblem.
```

Here's a description of the binary search algorithm:

> 1. Starting with a sorted array, we check whether it contains a particular value by comparing the search value with the element in the middle of the array.

Reviewer: Avoid ambiguous pronouns like 'it' when possible. 
```suggestion
1. Starting with a sorted array, we check whether the array contains a particular value by comparing the search value with the element in the middle of the array.
```

> 1. If we find the value we return the position where it was found.

Reviewer: Perhaps just me, but when I first read this step my brain wanted it to say 'we return _to_ the position', so removing the 'we' adds clarity. 
```suggestion
1. If we find the value, return the position where it was found.
```

> 1. If we find the value we return the position where it was found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If we find the value we return the position where the value was found.
```

> 1. If we don't find the value, we determine whether it would be in the left or right half of the array by seeing whether it is smaller or larger than the middle element. Remember, we can make this decision because _we assume the array is sorted!_ Then we perform a binary search on the selected half.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If we don't find the value, we determine whether it would be in the left or right half of the array by checking whether it is smaller or larger than the middle element. Remember, we can make this decision because _we assume the array is sorted!_ Then we perform a binary search on the selected half.
```

> 1. If we don't find the value, we determine whether it would be in the left or right half of the array by seeing whether it is smaller or larger than the middle element. Remember, we can make this decision because _we assume the array is sorted!_ Then we perform a binary search on the selected half.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If we don't find the value, we determine whether the value would be in the left or right half of the array by seeing whether the value is smaller or larger than the middle element. Remember, we can make this decision because _we assume the array is sorted!_ Then we perform a binary search on the selected half.
```

> 1. If at any point, we end up with an empty range, we know the value was not in the array, and we can return a result indicating the value was not found, such as `None`. Other variations of binary search may return the index of where the value _should_ have been, but as a negative value to indicate that it was missing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If at any point, we end up with an empty range, we know the value was not in the array, and we can return a result indicating the value was not found, such as `None`. Other variations of binary search may return the index of where the value _should_ have been, but as a negative value to indicate that the value was missing.
```

> 1. Each recursion divides the array in half and performs the binary search on a smaller subproblem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Each recursive call divides the array in half and performs the binary search on a smaller subproblem.
```

![Performing binary search for the value 5 in the sorted list (1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9). Looking for 5. Check the value at the midway index (s=0, m=4, e=8). 5 is less than 6. Adjust the ending index to rule out the right half. Check the value at the updated midway index (s=0, m=2, e=4). 5 is greater than 3. ADjust the starting index to rule out the left half. Check the value at the updated midway index (s=3, m=3, e=4). The value, 5, was found. Return the position, 3.](images/algorithmic-strategies_divide-and-conquer_binary-search.png)  
 _Fig. Looking for the position of the value 5 in a sorted array using binary search._

## Other Examples of Divide and Conquer Algorithms

The following material serves as an addendum to any Divide and Conquer content you may have covered in class. 

> ## Minimum and Maximum Elements in an Array

Reviewer: Make subtopic of divide and conquer
```suggestion
### Minimum and Maximum Elements in an Array
```

Suppose you are presented with the following problem:

*Given an integer array, find the minimum and maximum element present in it by making the minimum number of comparisons*

Let's solve this problem using the divide and conquer method.

The first step is to break the problem down into subproblems of the same type. We can do so by splitting the list into two halves repeatedly until there is only one element to observe. We will also need to keep track of the minimum and maximum elements we have encountered thus far. We will update the min and max once we've reached the base case of one element in the list.

1. Create placeholders for the minimum and maximum elements. Set the minimum to the maximum integer value, set the maximum to the minimum integer value.
1. Base Case: If there's only one element in the list, update the min and max by doing two comparisons
    1. If the min is bigger than the value of the one element in the list, update the min
    1. If the max is smaller than the value of the one element in the list, update the max
1. Recursively call the function on both halves of the list
1. Return the min and max values

> In this algorithm we are dividing the list up until there is only one element, making comparisons of the minimum and maximum values to this one element and updating the values if needed, and then combining the results by storing the minimum and maximum values encountered during our recursion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this algorithm we are dividing the list up until there is only one element, making comparisons of the minimum and maximum values to this one element and updating the values if needed, and then combining the results by storing the minimum and maximum values encountered during our recursive calls.
```

![Performing a modified version of Merge Sort to identify the minimum and maximum values of an array](images/algorithmic-strategies_divide-and-conquer_min-max.png)  
 _Fig. Performing a modified version of Merge Sort to identify the minimum and maximum values of an array._

### !callout-info

## Is there an echo in here?

> You may notice similarities between this algorithm and the Merge Sort algorithm described above. If so, that's great! The Merge Sort and Binary Search algorithms are excellent models for a large number of divide-and-conquer algorithms. Due to this fact, it is recommended to spend more time understanding Merge Sort and Binary Search than any other divide-and-conquer algorithms. 

Reviewer: Love this! Consider modifying to make it clear understanding the algorithms is the goal, not memorization. 
```suggestion
You may notice similarities between this algorithm and the Merge Sort algorithm described above. If so, that's great! The Merge Sort and Binary Search algorithms are excellent models for a large number of divide-and-conquer algorithms. While it is not necessary to memorize these algorithms, we do recommend prioritizing thoroughly understanding how the Merge Sort and Binary Search algorithms work over any other divide-and-conquer algorithms. 
```

### !end-callout

> Spend *no more than 15 minutes* writing a solution to the problem detailed above.

Reviewer: Consider adding a 0-points optional challenge question to give students a workspace

<details style="max-width: 700px; margin: auto;">

<summary>Click here to see a sample solution</summary>

> ```py

Reviewer: 💫 For whatever reason, I could not get code blocks within a details tab to register as code blocks so kudos to you for figuring that out

import sys
def findMinAndMax(nums, left, right, minNum=sys.maxsize, maxNum=-sys.maxsize):
    # base case: the list is of size 1
    if left == right:
        # set minNum to the minimum of the remaining element and the current minimum stored in minNum
        minNum = min(nums[left], minNum)
        # set maxNum to the maximum of the remaining element and the current max stored in maxNum
        maxNum = max(nums[left], maxNum)
        return minNum, maxNum

    # find the middle element
    mid = (left + right) // 2

    # recur for the left sublist
    minNum, maxNum = findMinAndMax(nums, left, mid, minNum, maxNum)

    # recur for the right sublist
    minNum, maxNum = findMinAndMax(nums, mid + 1, right, minNum, maxNum)

    return minNum, maxNum
```
</details>

### Binary Search: A modified approach

Binary search can be used to solve many problems related to searching through sorted data. The following problem offers an opportunity to use the binary search algorithm using a modified approach.

```

> Suppose you are given a sorted array of non-negative distinct integers. 

Reviewer: Use we over you where possible. 
```suggestion
Suppose we are given a sorted array of non-negative distinct integers. 
```

> You are tasked with finding the smallest missing non-negative element inside of the array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would like to find the smallest missing non-negative element inside of the array.
```

If present, the array should start with the integer 0.

For example:
If the array is [0, 1, 2, 6, 9, 11, 15], the smallest missing element is 3.

If the array is [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5], the smallest missing element is 6.
```

> This problem can be solved in O(n) time using a linear search to find the first index containing an element that does not match its value. However, this approach does not take advantage of the fact the input is sorted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This problem can be solved in O(n) time using a linear search to find the first index containing an element whose value and index are not equal. However, this approach does not take advantage of the fact the input is sorted.
```

We can instead use a modified binary search algorithm to solve the problem in O(log(n)) time.

> Spend *no more than 15 minutes* writing a modified binary search solution to the problem detailed above.

Reviewer: Again, I wonder if it would serve students to give them a workspace (via a challenge question) to do this work. Can be zero points so that it doesn't affect completion.

Author: Good idea, I'll add a challenge question for the two exercises

1. If at any point, we end up with an empty range, we know the value was not in the array, and we can return a result indicating the value was not found, such as `None`. Other variations of binary search may return the index of where the value _should_ have been, but as a negative value to indicate that it was missing.
1. Each recursion divides the array in half and performs the binary search on a smaller subproblem.

## Binary Search in the Wild

### Binary Search: A modified approach

The following material serves as an addendum to the Divide and Conquer lesson reviewed during class. 

Binary search can be used to solve many problems related to searching through sorted data. The following problem offers an opportunity to use the binary search algorithm using a modified approach.

```
Suppose you are given a sorted array of non-negative distinct integers. 
You are tasked with finding the smallest missing non-negative element inside of the array.

> The array should start with the integer 0, if it is present in the array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If present, the array should start with the integer 0.
```
